MULTIARCH-4252: namespace-scoped Pod Placement Config (#453)
openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator: docs/enhancements/MTO-0002-local-pod-placement.md

(a) enable the pod placement controller, (b) define a namespace selector to filter the namespaces whose pods should be
patched with the scheduling gate at admission time, and (c) have all the matching pods in the selected namespaces patched
with the node selector term for the compatible architectures to influence the pod scheduling's strong predicates run by the 
node affinity filtering plugin.
In [MULTIARCH-4970](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MULTIARCH-4970), we introduced new fields in the `PodPlacementConfig` that
allow users to define cluster-wide preferences to influence the node affinity scoring plugin with respect to the pod's
preferred architectures. However, users may want to have more granular control over the pod placement controller's behavior
by defining different preferences for different namespaces and sub-set of pods within a namespace.
This enhancement proposes to introduce a namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD that allows users to define the pod placement
controller's behavior at a namespace level. The namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD will include fields similar to the ones defined 

> in the current version of the cluster-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD, and label selectors to refine the scope of the configuration

Reviewer: nit: might want to call these out as concise bullet points to list out what the refinements.

Author: I reserved a list later in the doc. The idea here was to give a shorter summary/abstract about the feature. Wdyt?

to subset of pods within a namespace matching the label selector.

## Motivation
- Users want to have more granular control over the pod placement controller's behavior by defining different preferences 
for different namespaces and sub-set of pods within a namespace, given they are aware some pods can perform better on certain 
architectures or support cost-reduction strategies by running pods on cheaper nodes such as arm64 ones.

### User Stories
- As a cluster administrator, I want to define different preferences for different namespaces and sub-set of pods within a namespace
so that I can influence the node affinity scoring plugin with respect to the pod's preferred architectures at a namespace level.

### Goals
- Provide a namespace-scoped resource to define the pod placement controller's behavior at a namespace level for the node affinity 
  scoring plugin
- Provide a namespace-scoped resource to define the pod placement controller's behavior for the node affinity 
  scoring plugin on a subset of pods within a namespace

### Non-Goals

> - Allow users to define the pod placement controller's behavior at a pod level, selecting pods across multiple namespaces

Reviewer: instead of pod level - should it be "app" level across namespaces ?

- Allow users to define which namespaces should get the node affinity filtering plugin's behavior managed by the cluster-scoped 
  `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD: the cluster-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD will continue to be used for this purpose and will be

>   a dependency for the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD

Reviewer: why should it be a dependency? why can't they operate independently?

Author: In the first phase, having it as a dependency will allow us to reduce the development effort in the operator as the operator will not have to reconcile the same objects with changes to both the cluster-scoped object and namespace-scoped objects.

In the second phase, this traces back to the comment at https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/453#discussion_r1944944721. I would avoid users that enable the preference affinity (that tunes how pods are scheduled among differnet architectures) but no required affinity (that instead is a bare minimum to guarantee the scheduling correctness when dealing with multiple architecture nodes and pods of which the supported is unknown in the original specs).

An idea could be to let the operator create a default CPPC at installation time, but I would keep this possible work outside the scope of the feature discussed here.

Reviewer: agreed with this idea as per dicussion. we should also consider creating the CPPC by default when deploying through OLM - this means the feature is "turned" on by default - but since we want that bare minimum guarantee this makes sense.

Author: I'd create a story for this.

## Proposal

We introduce a new namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD that allows users to define the pod placement controller's 
behavior at a namespace level.

Its development is expected to ship in the following phases:

- Phase 1 - initial introduction of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD:

> 	- The multiarch tuning operator will refuse the creation of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD if the cluster-scoped

Reviewer: Why can't the namespace podplacementconfig encompass what the clusterpodplacementconfig does?we can evaluate both if present and make sure the namespace configs get preference over the cluster wide config

Author: We want the cluster pod placement object to handle the required affinity. Users can use namespace selectors to select or restrict the namespaces the required affinity is reconciled on, but that work requires secrets that the service account in the user namespace should be allowed to access and that's something we would rather want to be widely enabled in clusters as more critical and a prelude to touning the scoring plugins.

	  `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD is not present

> 	- The pod placement controller deployed when the `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD is present will be able to also apply 

Author: > so are we saying that in phase 1 - the same controller(used for cluster wide ppc) is used for namespace scoped ppc as well?
yes
> is that why we have the dependence?
Yes, but also see https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/453#discussion_r1944949949

> 	- The pod placement controller deployed when the `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD is present will be able to also apply 

Reviewer 2: I think this makes sense.  The suggestion is for a union of the two? Does namespace override Cluster?

> 	- The pod placement controller deployed when the `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD is present will be able to also apply 

Author: Yes, the namespace-scoped PPCs are applied in ascending order of priority (the highest in priority takes precedence over any others that would change the same scheduling fields). You can consider the CPPC as the lowest in priority (if no PPC match a given pod, the CPPC preferredAffinity configuration is applied).

      the configuration to the pods in the selected namespaces, if any namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD is present.
    - The namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD will include fields similar to the ones defined in the current version of the 
	  cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD, and label selectors to refine the scope of the configuration to subset of pods within 
	  a namespace matching the label selector.
    - The namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD will take precedence over the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD when 
	  both configure the same plugins for the same pods.
- Phase 2 - Sharding the pod placement controller into per-namespace deployments:

> 	- When at least one namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD is present in a given namespace, the multiarch tuning operator

Reviewer: we will also make the pod unecessarily go through 2 scheduling gates if we mandate that a cluster wide podplacementconfig is mandatory

Author: Yes, I'm essentially proposing a simple distributed transaction following the micro-services patterns.

- The scheduling gate of the local PodPlacementConfig will be used for tuning the preferences (and possibly other fields handled by future plugins)
- The scheduling gate of the ClusterPodPlacementConfig will mainly be used for handling the required affinity (or the global preferences if no PodPlacementConfig handles it already).

Author: I'll add this question and respons at the end of the document.

Author: Added this discussion in the open questions

### Phase 1

#### Namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD

The namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD will include fields similar to the ones defined in the current version of the
cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD, and label selectors to refine the scope of the configuration to subset of pods within
the namespace.

The following `yaml` snippet shows the structure of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD:

```yaml
apiVersion: multiarch.openshift.io/v1beta1
kind: `PodPlacementConfig`
metadata:
  name: my-namespace-config
  namespace: my-namespace
spec:
  labelSelector:
      matchExpressions:
        - key: app
          operator: In
          values:
            - my-label-for-apps-performing-better-on-arm64
  priority: 100
  plugins:
    nodeAffinityScoring:
      enabled: true
      platforms:
        - architecture: amd64
          weight: 25
        - architecture: arm64
          weight: 75
```

The `plugins.nodeAffinityScoring` fields are defined as in the current version of the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD,
implemented at https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/369.

> The `priority` field is an integer that defines the priority of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD. The higher the value, the higher the priority.

Reviewer: does priority have a range?

Author: Added some more details in https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/453/commits/ba58c764501df40a5d957a8f0ec7aeb2f81812a9, thanks for pointing this out.

patched with the scheduling gate at admission time, and (c) have all the matching pods in the selected namespaces patched
with the node selector term for the compatible architectures to influence the pod scheduling's strong predicates run by the 
node affinity filtering plugin.
In [MULTIARCH-4970](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MULTIARCH-4970), we introduced new fields in the `PodPlacementConfig` that
allow users to define cluster-wide preferences to influence the node affinity scoring plugin with respect to the pod's
preferred architectures. However, users may want to have more granular control over the pod placement controller's behavior
by defining different preferences for different namespaces and sub-set of pods within a namespace.
This enhancement proposes to introduce a namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD that allows users to define the pod placement
controller's behavior at a namespace level. The namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD will include fields similar to the ones defined 
in the current version of the cluster-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD, and label selectors to refine the scope of the configuration

> to subset of pods within a namespace matching the label selector.

Reviewer 2: Nice!

## Motivation
- Users want to have more granular control over the pod placement controller's behavior by defining different preferences 

> for different namespaces and sub-set of pods within a namespace, given they are aware some pods can perform better on certain 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for different namespaces and a subset of pods within a namespace, given they are aware some pods can perform better on certain 
```

> architectures or support cost-reduction strategies by running pods on cheaper nodes such as arm64 ones.

Reviewer 2: Also, for the situation when multiple operators share the same namespace are independently supporting different architectures. For instance, the openshift-operators example.

Author: MTO 1.0 already removed that restriction and changed it to ignore any pods that should land in the control plane nodes. The operator pods in the openshift-operators namespace that are not bound to the master nodes should already be considered.

### User Stories

> - As a cluster administrator, I want to define different preferences for different namespaces and sub-set of pods within a namespace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- As a cluster administrator, I want to define different preferences for different namespaces and a subset of pods within a namespace
```

so that I can influence the node affinity scoring plugin with respect to the pod's preferred architectures at a namespace level.

### Goals
- Provide a namespace-scoped resource to define the pod placement controller's behavior at a namespace level for the node affinity 
  scoring plugin
- Provide a namespace-scoped resource to define the pod placement controller's behavior for the node affinity 
  scoring plugin on a subset of pods within a namespace

### Non-Goals

> - Allow users to define multiple pod placement configurations that tune the placement of pods across multiple namespaces

Reviewer 2: Confirming my understanding... Does that imply a single PodPlacementConfig would be used for multiple different placements?

Author: A single namespace-scoped PodPlacementConfig will only work on pods of its namespace.

If you have two pods in two different namespaces that you would patch with the same preferred affinities you should either use the CPPC or two PPCs (one per namespace)

> - Allow users to define which namespaces should get the node affinity filtering plugin's behavior managed by the cluster-scoped 

Reviewer 2: I mentioned the openshift-operators example namespace. Currently, openshift-* is excluded. 

Would there be a need for a relaxed approach now?

Reviewer 2: Or special treatment for that namespace?

Author: See https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/453#discussion_r1946426754

  namespace: my-namespace
spec:
  labelSelector:
      matchExpressions:
        - key: app
          operator: In
          values:
            - my-label-for-apps-performing-better-on-arm64
  priority: 100
  plugins:
    nodeAffinityScoring:
      enabled: true
      platforms:
        - architecture: amd64
          weight: 25
        - architecture: arm64
          weight: 75
```

The `plugins.nodeAffinityScoring` fields are defined as in the current version of the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD,
implemented at https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/369.

The `priority` field is an integer that defines the priority of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD. The higher the value, the higher the priority.
If multiple namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` objects are present in a namespace, the one with the highest priority will take precedence over the others when
a pod matches the label selector of multiple `PodPlacementConfig` objects.

#### Changes to the Multiarch Tuning Operator

A new validating webhook will be added to the multiarch tuning operator to validate the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig`.

> In particular, the webhook will deny the creation of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` if the cluster-scoped 

Reviewer: can this validation be done as part of the CRD reconciliation itself? do we need a validating webhook for this? i.e, when the namespace ppc is created, check for existence of cluster wide ppc and in the cluster wide ppc reconciliation make sure it cannot be deleted

Author: A validation webhook should automatically in place once we build the multi version feature for the api as it is needed for future improvement. Therefore we can use it for both defaulting the priority to the right value and to check whether to deny the creation of the ppc

The `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` validating webhook also has to deny the deletion of the `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` object if there are any `PodPlacementConfig` objects in the cluster.
The webhook is deployed as part of the multiarch tuning operator deployment, similarly to how the current version of the operator 
deploys the validating webhook for the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig`.

#### Changes to the Pod Placement Controller

In order to apply the configurations defined by the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD, the pod placement controller will be changed such that it applies any
matching namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD to the pods in the selected namespaces, sorted by ascending priority, before applying the cluster-scoped
`ClusterPodPlacementConfig` configuration.

Given a pod hitting the pod reconciliation loop:
1. Verify the pod has the scheduling gate (return if not)
2. Get all the pod placement configurations in the pod's namespace, sorted by descending priority
3. For each pod placement configuration:
	- Check if the pod matches the label selector

> 	- Apply the configuration to the pod.

Reviewer 2: Something strange about the preview.... bad character/formatting?

Author: It should be a tab, used to build a nested list.

Author: Confirmed

    - If a proposed configuration overlaps with the current pod specification, it is not applied and an event
      is recorded in the pod's event log. This ensures that the operator does not overwrite the user's configuration and 
      that a `PodPlacementConfig` CRD with a higher priority gets precedence over the ones with lower priority.
4. Apply the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` configuration to the pod. As the namespace-scoped configuration 
   has already been applied, the cluster-scoped configuration will not overwrite any overlapping namespace-scoped configuration.
   We can also garantee that the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig`'s strong predicates will be applied to the pods as they
   are not handled by the namespace-scoped resource, which is focused on the scheduling scoring plugins.

#### Changes to the Mutating Webhook

No changes are required to the mutating webhook, as the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD depends on the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD and its business logic is implemented by the same controller responsible for reconciling through its scheduling gate.

#### RBAC

We will introduce rules to allow the

> multiarch tuning operator and pod placement controller to, respectively, reconcile (CRUD) and read 

Reviewer: what roles would the namespace ppc controller need? i hope it doesn't inherit all the roles from the operator

Reviewer: ok - the below rbac section answers this question - would be nice to consolidate those

Author: Added two tables for teh phase 2

## Infrastructure Needed

## Open Questions

In phase2, is it necessary to let the pods go through two scheduling gates? Does it duplicate the work done by the controllers?

- Using two scheduling gates enable a basic distributed transaction following the micro-services patterns, mediated by the scheduling gates set in the pod specs (distributed shared state):
	 - The scheduling gate of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` will be used for tuning the preferences (and possibly other fields handled by future plugins) first
	 - Then, the scheduling gate of the ClusterPodPlacementConfig will mainly be used by the cluster-wide controller to handle the required affinity, and the global preferences if no PodPlacementConfig handles it already.

>      - The controllers of the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` will not handle the strong predicates, as (a) we want the users willing to tune their architecture-aware pod placement preferences only after the strong predicates are guarateed, and (b) we would need to allow the service accounts in the user namespace to access secrets like the global pull secret, which we might rather prefer to allow only in the core namespace running the cluster-wide controller and operator.

Reviewer 2: Overall awesome... I'm excited to see this in place. Thank you for the write up and consideration

The `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` validating webhook also has to deny the deletion of the `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` object if there are any `PodPlacementConfig` objects in the cluster.
The webhook is deployed as part of the multiarch tuning operator deployment, similarly to how the current version of the operator 
deploys the validating webhook for the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig`.

#### Changes to the Pod Placement Controller

In order to apply the configurations defined by the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD, the pod placement controller will be changed such that it applies any
matching namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD to the pods in the selected namespaces, sorted by ascending priority, before applying the cluster-scoped
`ClusterPodPlacementConfig` configuration.

Given a pod hitting the pod reconciliation loop:
1. Verify the pod has the scheduling gate (return if not)
2. Get all the pod placement configurations in the pod's namespace, sorted by descending priority
3. For each pod placement configuration:
	- Check if the pod matches the label selector

> 	- Apply the configuration to the pod.

Reviewer 3: Does the following situation exist:
the image supported architecture doesn't exist in preference Arch in plugins.

Reviewer 3: what I mean is that if a pod container using single arch image like `ppc64le`, but the namespace-scoped ppc set a plugins configure like below,  finially we set nodeAffinity with supported arch `ppc64le`, right?
```
plugins:
    nodeAffinityScoring:
      enabled: true
      platforms:
        - architecture: amd64
          weight: 25
        - architecture: arm64
          weight: 75
```

Reviewer: the required during scheduling affinity will always be added by cppc. in this case the preferred during scheduling affinity will also be added with weights - it just won't do anything

| pods                                             | get, list, watch, patch, update |                                                                                                                     | 
| pods/status                                      | update                          |                                                                                                                     |
| security.openshift.io/securitycontextconstraints | use                             | it's used in case the pods are created by a user/SA that needs some privileges                                      |
| events                                           | create, patch                   |                                                                                                                     |
| podplacementconfigs.multiarch.openshift.io       | get, list, watch                |                                                                                                                     |

> | configmaps, secrets							    | get, list, watch                | (future) (not needed by the current plugins) if other plugins will require them  to communicaet with  the registries |

Reviewer: will secrets be a cluster role since we need the global pull secret?

Author: You're right, removed for now.

### Risks and Mitigations

### Drawbacks

### Open Questions

### Test Plan

#### Unit Testing and Integration Test Suites

- Unit Testing: Test each new function, method, and feature in isolation to ensure correctness, reliability, and
  robustness. Verify that the new code paths are covered by the unit tests and that the code behaves as expected
  under different conditions.
- Integration Test Suite: Run integration tests against a simulated control plane using the operator SDK's envtest
  facilities. We will add the necessary test cases to ensure the reconciliation loop of the new `PodPlacementConfig` is working as expected and that pods are reconciled according to both the cluster-scoped and namespace-scoped configurations in the correct order.

#### Functional Test Suite

##### Phase 1

- The operator should refuse the creation of a namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD if the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD is not present.
- The operator should refuse the deletion of the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` CRD if there are any namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRDs in the cluster.

> - The pod placement controller should apply the configuration defined by the namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD to the pods in the selected namespaces, and the cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig` configuration for preferred affinities should be ignored

Reviewer 3: is this mean that we can configure  `plugins.nodeAffinityScoring` in both cluster-scoped `ClusterPodPlacementConfig`  and namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig`? , and When both are configured simultaneously, namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` has high priority?

Reviewer 3: it is, I review the doc more carefully, and got it https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/453/files#diff-27f8af5ef3f4486c4eb3358b6a8eab0f5a2b3e87af390e523c5bb6a1355b73d1R73-R74

- The pod placement controller should apply the configuration defined by the highest-priority namespace-scoped `PodPlacementConfig` CRD to pods matching multiple `PodPlacementConfig` CRDs in the same namespace
- No PPC with the same priority should be allowed in the same namespace

> - When no priority is set in the `PodPlacementConfig`, the operator should default to the lowest priority among the existing Pod Placement Configs in the same namespace decreased by 1

Reviewer 3: what will occur when new ppc with no priority is created but the current lowest priority of ppc in the namespace is already 0?  will the creation be rejected?

Author: That's a good point @lwan-wanglin. I updated the proposal by defaulting to 0 and increasing the value for each new one PPC that gets created.

In this way:
- 'newly' created PPCs (if the priority field is omitted), gets a higher priority (instead of a lower one)
- The issue arises when the highest priority is 255, in which case, we'd reject the creation (Adding a test case for this too).

Reviewer: i'm wondering if we are being too rigid with the priority. if no priority is defined, we should just set it to 0. If there are multiple ppc's with no priority it's a random pick. If the user really cares, they will specify the priority. This way is less deterministic when ppcs get evaluated, but assuming that a PPC which is created first has a higher priority might not be the best assumption to go with.

On the other hand, if a value is specified, we should take care that no other ppc has the same value - I'm fine with that.

Author: Given what you say, is your idea to:
1. Allow multiple PPCs with priority 0
2. Do not allow multiple PPCs with same priority != 0
?

Reviewer: that was the idea. If we want we could allow multiple ppc's with the same non-zero priority as well - but then we have to think about a strategy of the order of evaluating ppc's within each priority bucket (FIFO, lifo, etc...) . Not sure that level of complexity is required at first so I thought if priority is specified we make sure it doesn't collide

Author: I'm removing the constraint to have the priority field as autoincremented but still ensuring the priorities are unique in the same namespace.

I wouldn't go into defining a sorting system among 'buckets' of PPC with the same priority either.

When users do not set the priority, it defaults to 0.

Finally, if a PPC with priority 0 exists already, the creation fails, requesting the user to set the priority explicitly.

Author: See https://github.com/openshift/multiarch-tuning-operator/pull/453/commits/6f4e4ca2aa83dbe7f0eac749574d200de6a9d435, now squashed

Reviewer: > Finally, if a PPC with priority 0 exists already, the creation fails, requesting the user to set the priority explicitly.

I'm ok with this model for now - just wanted more flexibility from the perspective of the user in case they don't care about setting priority and the order in which it is processed - because now we are forcing them to think about it.
